Title: Python Performance Profiling: The Guts And The Glory

Tracks: "Python", "Tools & Techniques"

Duration: 40 minutes

Description:

If your talk is accepted this will be made public and printed in the program.
Should be one paragraph, maximum 400 characters.

Your Python program is too slow, and you need to optimize it. Where do you
start? With the right tools, you can optimize your code where it counts. We’ll
explore the guts of the Python profiler "Yappi" to understand its features and
limitations. We’ll learn how to find the maximum performance wins with minimum
effort.

Prerequisite knowledge for this session:

Some familiarity with Python. Basic understanding of multithreading.

Abstract:

Detailed description. Will be made public if your talk is accepted.

My boss alerted me to an article on a popular site, which claimed to show that
my open-source Python client for MongoDB is three times slower than the
Javascript client. Anxiety immediately set in: Was this true? Could I improve
it? What should I tell my boss?

I'll describe three open-source profilers for Python, and explain why Yappi is
the right profiler for this job.

Optimization is like debugging: we use the scientific method. We form a
hypothesis about what changes we can make to our code to make it faster, and we
estimate how much improvement an optimization can yield. Then comes the second
part of the scientific method: we test the hypothesis with an experiment.

And now, let's return to the problem at hand: Is my code slow? We'll use Yappi
to form some hypotheses, then validate them with tests. Finally, I have an
answer to my boss's question, and better yet, I can back up my answer with hard
evidence.

Outline:

* Setting the scene

My boss alerted me to an article on a popular site, which claimed to show that
my open-source Python client for MongoDB is three times slower than the
Javascript client. Anxiety immediately set in: Was this true? Could I improve
it? What should I tell my boss?

* Why profile?

A typical program spends almost all its time in a small subset of its code.
Optimizing those hotspots is all that matters. This is what a profiler is for:
it leads us straight to the functions where we should spend our effort. So I
decided to profile the code in the article to see why it was slow.

* Which profiler?

I’ll describe three open-source profilers for Python: cProfile is a fast
single-thread profiler included in the Python standard library.
GreenletProfiler is my package for profiling Gevent applications. Yappi is a
third-party package that can profile multiple threads. I used Yappi for this
investigation, since it’s the most featureful.

* How do we profile and what information do we get?

Yappi has configuration options for how it measures time and which functions it
profiles. I’ll show you how I configured and ran Yappi, and how I visualized
its output in KCacheGrind.

* How do we use the profiling information?

I used KCacheGrind’s different views to narrow the search for hotspots, and
calculated upper bounds for what performance enhancements I could achieve.
Optimization is like debugging: we form a hypothesis for what changes will
yield the best speedups, than perform experiments. This forms a virtuous cycle
of benchmarking and improving our code. I’ll relate the shocking conclusion to
my investigation of the slow code.

* How does profiling work?

If you’re like me, you can’t sleep if you don’t understand how something works.
We’ll briefly explore how cProfile and Yappi hook into the Python interpreter’s
guts, and how Yappi employs a clever trick to efficiently profile all running
threads.

Notes:

Anything else you'd like the program committee to know when making their
selection: your past speaking experience, open source community experience,
etc.

I’m a Senior Python Engineer at MongoDB in New York City. I’m the author of
GreenletProfiler, a fast greenlet-aware profiler for Python. I wrote Motor, an
async MongoDB driver for Tornado, and also Toro, a library of locks and queues
for Tornado coroutines. I contribute to Python, PyMongo, MongoDB, Tornado, and
Tulip / asyncio. I blog about Python and other topics at emptysquare.net and
DZone.

Past speaking experience:

* "What Is Async, How Does It Work, and When Should I Use It?" Open Source
  Bridge, June 2013.
* Python coroutines. NY Python Meetup, April 2013.
* Talks on topics including MongoDB schema design, replication, and the
  aggregation framework. MongoDB Atlanta in April 2012, MongoDB Chicago in
  November 2012, and WindyCityDB in January 2013.
* Talks on Motor, my async driver for MongoDB and Python. MongoDB Chicago in
  November 2012, Python and MongoDB Meetups in Seattle and Philadelphia, and at
  PyGotham in June 2012.
* MongoDB training sessions, with between 6 and 20 students, lasting 2 or 3
  full days, given 4 times during 2012 and 2013.

Videos of me speaking:

* A lightning talk from PyCon 2013, about Toro, a package of locks and queues
  for Python async coroutines.
  http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=pYZNLOKEE5I

Open source community experience:

* Committer on Tulip, Guido van Rossum’s Python async framework. Author of its
  Queue implementation.
* Committer on PyMongo, the official Python driver for MongoDB.
* Contributor to Tornado, a popular Python async framework.
* Author of open-source Python packages GreenletProfiler, Motor, Toro, and
  YieldPoints.
